Can you imagine a collection
of some 40 million books?
They would fill more than 800 miles,
or 1,300 kilometers, of bookshelves?
And yet, that is what you can find
in what has been described
as the largest library in the world
—the Library of Congress
in Washington, D.C.,
in the United States.
Which book would you say
is the most worthwhile to read
among all of those millions of volumes?
We can let the apostle Paul
answer that question.
In his second letter to Timothy
at 2 Timothy 3:15,
he referred to “the holy writings,
which are able to make [us]
wise for salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus.”
He was referring, of course,
to God’s own written Word
that we know as the Bible.
The contents of this book can give us
the wisdom that we need to gain salvation,
and that makes it
the most worthwhile book on earth.
But how can a book have
such a profound effect on a person?
Well, when describing books
and their authors per se,
the secular writer Gilbert Highet once stated
that books are not “lumps of lifeless paper,
“but minds alive on the shelves.
“From each of them goes out
its own voice . . .
“So by taking down one of these volumes
and opening it,
“one can call into range
the voice of a man the author,
“far distant in time and space,
and hear him speaking to us,
mind to mind, heart to heart.”
When we take this book, the Bible,
down off the shelf and open it,
we are calling into range
the voice of its Author, Jehovah.
And is he speaking to us
mind to mind, heart to heart?
Indeed, he is.
For example, at Jeremiah 29:11,
Jehovah tells us:
“I well know the thoughts
that I am thinking toward you, . . .
“thoughts of peace, and not of calamity,
to give you a future and a hope.”
And at Proverbs 27:11, Jehovah tells us:
“Be wise . . . and make my heart rejoice,
so that I can make a reply
to him who taunts me.”
How grateful we are
that Jehovah has given us
his precious Word, the Bible,
that reveals his intimate thoughts
and feelings,
that draws us close to him,
and that teaches us
how to gain everlasting life!
Because we love Jehovah,
we also love and cherish
what he tells us
through the pages of his written Word.
And that is exactly how the psalmist felt
who wrote the 119th Psalm.
Please open your Bible to Psalm 119,
and find verse 161.
That’s Psalm 119:161.
In the latter part, it says:
“But my heart stands in awe of your words.”
Now see what more he wrote
in verses 167 and 168:
“I keep your reminders,
and I love them dearly.
“I observe your orders and your reminders,
for you are aware of all that I do.”
This Bible writer did not view
God’s orders and reminders
as just a list of cold, legalistic statutes.
And we can be sure
that he did not consider them
to be burdensome.
Instead, he knew that they formed the basis
for the best life possible.
And that is why he not only wanted
to learn God’s orders,
but he also desired to observe,
or obey, them.
The psalmist believed that God’s Word
is the one thing worth studying,
and that because of knowing
God’s orders and reminders,
we are far wiser than people
who know everything else
except God’s Word.
Now look at what more he wrote in verse 165:
“Abundant peace
belongs to those who love your law;
nothing can make them stumble.”
Herein lies a major reason
why we love God’s Word:
Abiding by it leads to genuine peace.
Everyone longs for peace in their life,
and through the pages of the Bible,
we learn how to attain it.
That is why we choose to live by God’s Word
even in the face of the trials
that arise in our life
—some of which may try to steal away
our peace of mind and heart.
And yet, Jehovah knows what we
are going through every day of our lives
and stands ready to help us.
If we love and obey Jehovah’s Word,
we will not be stumbled spiritually
by what someone else does or says
or by any other matter or situation in life.
But how does love for God’s Word
lead to such peace
and keep us from stumbling?
We know
that “all scripture is inspired of God,”
making the Bible the most reliable guide
for every aspect of life.
After all, his wisdom
is infinitely superior to our own.
Reading the Bible enables us
to look at matters
from God’s elevated point of view.
It is just as the prophet Isaiah wrote
at Isaiah 55:8, 9.
If you’d like to open to that, please
—Isaiah 55:8, 9.
He wrote: “‘For my thoughts
are not your thoughts,
“and your ways are not my ways,’
declares Jehovah.
“‘For as the heavens
are higher than the earth,
“‘so my ways are higher than your ways
and my thoughts than your thoughts.’”
Just imagine
—Jehovah’s thoughts and language
must be vastly superior to those of humans.
When he communicates with us,
as he does through the pages of the Bible,
he simplifies how he expresses his thoughts
so that we can understand them.
Then as we take in all that Jehovah says,
we can let his thinking guide our thinking.
Reading the Bible
can be likened to peering into a mirror
because its message
has the power to allow us
to see ourselves as we really are
and it shows us where adjustments
are needed
in our attitude and conduct.
Thus far in this symposium,
we have seen how this can actually work.
We have seen two dramatizations
of a widowed mother
using the Bible to help her teenage children
avoid being stumbled
by other young people
who had been harassing them.
Remember, her son, Gabe,
had been called a coward
by a couple of tough-looking youths
while he was engaged in public witnessing.
And her daughter, Olivia,
had been chided by other girls
for not being interested in dating
one of the guys in her class.
Their mother used what Jehovah inspired
the apostle Paul to write about
with his ordeal in prison
to show how he was able
to preserve his peace
in a very difficult situation.
And that, in turn, helped Olivia and Gabe
to safeguard their own peace.
Let’s see what more the mother finds
in the Bible to help Olivia
avoid being stumbled into conduct
that could rob her of peace.
Guess who just walked in?
Olivia.
And there’s Jake.
Would she ever?
You know she’s wild.
I don’t even think she likes guys.
What if she’s into girls?
I bet she’s still a virgin.
Olivia, what are you thinking?
I don’t—I don’t know how they could do that.
I don’t even follow them.
If this doesn’t stop,
I don’t know if I can . . .
You’re strong, OK.
You just can’t let them get to you.
It feels out of your control, doesn’t it?
Hey, I think we need another Bible example.
Remember when we studied
about the Shulammite girl?
Yeah, I remember.
And who was pressuring her?
Solomon.
But she wasn’t interested in him,
just like I’m not interested
in that boy Jake, so . . .
But it wasn’t just him;
there were the daughters of Jerusalem
in Solomon’s court.
They urged her to accept his attentions.
But do you remember what she said
in Song of Solomon chapter 2?
It says: “I put you under oath,
“O daughters of Jerusalem,
“by the gazelles and the does of the field:
“Do not try to awaken or arouse love in me
until it feels inclined.”
So despite all of the pressure,
who was really in control?
She was.
No one was going to push her
into something that she didn’t want to do.
She even said: “I am a wall.”
You have the same power.
And if you believe that,
it’ll change how you handle the pressure.
Now give me a hug.
Hey, guys, update on yesterday’s topic.
I guess she still needs a man.
She needs something.
I just posted it. Go like my video.
All they want is to see me give in.
Hey, guys, update on yesterday’s topic.
I guess she still needs . . .
Why would I give them the satisfaction?
My peace comes from doing the right thing.
Nobody can make me stumble.
“I am a wall.”
Olivia’s mother thought
of another inspired Bible example,
that of the Shulammite girl
who was being urged
by the young women in Solomon’s court
to accept his amorous attentions.
But despite the pressure,
the Shulammite girl remained in control
for no one was going to push her
into something that she did not want to do.
Olivia got the point
as she thought to herself:
‘My peace comes from doing the right thing.
Nobody can make me stumble. I am a wall.’
It’s obvious that the mother
had a real love for God’s Word, knew it well,
and calmly and skillfully used it
to guide the thinking of her children
to keep them from stumbling.
So many people these days
put God’s Word out of their mind
to prevent it from influencing their life.
But as the world’s morals decline,
we must stick loyally to God’s Word
to conform our conduct
to his pure and holy thinking
and strengthen our determination
to live by his standards.
That is just what the apostle Paul
urged us to do
at Romans 12:2.
If you would turn there, please
—Romans 12:2.
Paul wrote:
“And stop being molded
by this system of things,
“but be transformed
by making your mind over,
“so that you may prove to yourselves
the good and acceptable
and perfect will of God.”
God’s Word strengthens us
to resist conforming
to the corrupting practices of Satan’s world
and to suppress temptations
toward wrongdoing.
Now, as we prove to ourselves
that the will of God is good and perfect,
then we should also accept
that loyally obeying God
is the best way of living.
There is a direct connection
between heeding Scriptural teachings
and obeying or enjoying genuine peace.
However, for Jehovah’s Word
to have such power in our lives,
we need to read the Bible every day
and meditate on why its counsel
is beneficial.
That means reading it at a pace
that allows us to ponder
on what we are reading.
And doing this helps to fix in our minds
the portions
that are especially helpful to us.
When asked why he reads the Bible
every day,
one Christian replied:
“If I repeatedly pray to Jehovah
during the day
“and expect him to hear me,
“why shouldn’t I also listen to God
by reading his Word every day?
“If we want to be a good friend,
why would we do all the talking?”
He makes a very good point, doesn’t he?
By reading the Bible,
we are listening to Jehovah,
and that is how we get
his viewpoint on matters.
So do you allow God
to speak to you every day?
We can measure
how effective our Bible reading is
by the influence it has
on our attitude and conduct.
When our peace is disturbed,
we can look into the source of divine wisdom
for God’s guidance.
Speaking prophetically of anointed Christians
at Isaiah 54:13, the prophet wrote:
“All your sons will be taught by Jehovah,
and [their] peace . . . will be abundant.”
Now, those words apply in principle
to Christ’s other sheep as well.
Thankfully, when Christ’s anointed brothers,
“the faithful and discreet slave,”
prepare spiritual food for us,
such as this convention program,
they hold firmly to Jehovah’s Word
and they never water it down.
We always receive spiritual instruction
that upholds Jehovah’s high moral standards,
and we are blessed with abundant peace
when we accept Jehovah’s instruction.
Isaiah penned another prophecy
that is being fulfilled today,
and we find that at Isaiah 2:2-4.
He saw in a vision of the last days
people from all the nations
streaming to true worship.
And for what reason?
Isaiah wrote of Jehovah:
“He will instruct us about his ways,
and we will walk in his paths.”
And in what would this result?
So that “they will beat their swords
into plowshares
“and their spears into pruning shears.
“Nation will not lift up sword
against nation,
nor will they learn war anymore.”
In his goodness, Jehovah is willing
to teach us imperfect humans
how to achieve genuine,
abundant peace earth wide.
And he does that through the pages
of his own written Word.
What a privilege it is
to be taught by our God!
No matter what problem may threaten
the peace of our personal life,
our family, or our congregation,
we are confident that the solution
can be found in the Bible.
And as we have learned from this symposium,
our continued love for Jehovah,
for our neighbor, and for God’s Word
will lead to our enjoying everlasting peace
in God’s new world.